---
layout: post
title: A Critique of Vulnerability
date: 2017-07-17
category: Notes
lede: "Four types of emotional vulnerability that you shouldn't lean into."
author: Patrick Steadman
published: true
image: "https://computerlab.io/images/coding-at-bar.jpg"
---

__Four types of emotional vulnerability that you shouldn't lean into.__

In her massively successful TED talk, titled ["The Power of
Vulnerability,"](https://www.ted.com/talks/brene_brown_on_vulnerability)
research professor Brene Brown says that we deal with today’s insecure world by
numbing vulnerability, and we should fight that by embracing vulnerability
wholeheartedly. This mindset has become mainstream, leading to vulnerability
being celebrated regardless of context. It's worth investigating who stands to
gain from a culture where vulnerability is normalized or encouraged. A culture
of vulnerability can be exploited by a predator, or an institution with its own
impersonal goals, like a [drug rehab
cult](http://paleofuture.gizmodo.com/synanons-sober-utopia-how-a-drug-rehab-program-became-1562665776)
or [millennial underwear
company](https://www.racked.com/2017/3/14/14911228/thinx-miki-agrawal-health-care-branding).
Vulnerability can be used as a shortcut to, or a replacement for, deeper
connection.

![Vulnerability starter pack](/images/vulnerability.jpg)

In startup and DIY music scenes, vulnerability and confessionalism permeate all
aspects of the culture. It’s unclear if whether or not these scenes have higher
or lower rates of predatory behavior, but it’s certainly the case that people
seem more shocked when instances of predatory behavior come to light in these
spaces.

Perhaps we should be more wary of people who loudly brand themselves as
“harmless” or “sensitive”. Why would someone need to publicly identify as
“gentle”? This also goes for people who broadcast their more uncouth impulses,
sexual or otherwise, while cushioning them with indicators of awareness and
coyness. The veneer of embarrassment and shame is what builds the other person’s
trust.

Finally, what does “vulnerability” even mean: is it all about disclosing
secrets, taking social risks, appearing helpless, or a combination?

### Modes of Interpersonal Vulnerability

#### Externally Induced mode

As a baseline, we can think about how vulnerability is experienced in a private
way. For example, someone lost in a strange city feels helpless, isolated, and
may act or think in ways that they normally wouldn’t.  Being lost, dealing with
an emotionally abusive boss, or storming a beachhead would make a person feel
vulnerable even if they were alone, but when these situations are experienced
with others, a whole different set of vulnerabilities come into play. Externally
induced interpersonal vulnerability occurs when elements beyond one’s control
force a group of people to become vulnerable with each other.

#### Weaponized mode

In recent years, awareness of tactics like
[negging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negging) and [love
bombing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Love_bombing) has increased.  Both of
these tactics, when effective, trigger a vulnerability script that seeks a
resolution. Revealing personal intimacies or traumas establishes a level of
closeness that isn’t necessarily deserved.  The victim of weaponized
vulnerability feels a need to match behavior to the level of emotion forced upon
them. The weaponized mode of vulnerability is one of the tools of the alt
rapist, and isn’t questioned as much in a culture where vulnerability is
normalized.

#### As Small Talk mode

In some circles, sharing vulnerabilities is the easiest way to have a
conversation that isn’t about the weather. Talking about yourself is easy, and
in a group of uneasy people, confessing a vulnerability can quickly establish
rapport. In the art world, for example, you might not want to talk about your
work, the event you’re at, or geopolitics. This tends to only work in the short
term, though, because people may realize you have few real interests.

#### Performative mode

Performative vulnerability often lacks the malice of weaponized vulnerability,
but its main function is still a means to an end. In this mode, an individual
consciously or unconsciously manipulates systems of power to validate their
specific vulnerabilities, and a receptive, vulnerable audience feels validated
as well. Once a vulnerability has been elevated to the level of art or at least
relatable content, it becomes less of a vulnerability and more of an asset.

#### Mutual mode

The mutual mode of vulnerability simply lacks the pathologies of the modes
defined above. It’s an essential part of relationships and bonding, but also
tends to be unique across different relationships.

<br>

It’s useful to analyze situations where people experience emotional
vulnerability to see which mode they match best. For example, you may have heard
of [“The 36 Questions That Lead to
Love”](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/11/fashion/no-37-big-wedding-or-small.html).
The questions originate from a 1997 study where professors paired students
during a regular class session. The students then took turn asking and answering
the questions. Much has been made of the fact that the students reported
‘significant post-interaction closeness’ relative to other cohorts, even
resulting in improbable marriages.

While the reciprocal nature of the question and response format might appear
mutual, the fact that the study was arbitrarily imposed on the students by
professors means that the dynamic at play during the interaction is best
characterized as externally induced vulnerability. The questions used in the
study have since been widely circulated online for use in team building or
relationship counseling. It’s possible to imagine the questions being used by a
couple or group in a truly mutual way, but it’s easier to imagine someone using
the questions as a sort of elaborate pick up line. It’s useful to analyze
situations where people experience emotional vulnerability to see which mode
they match best. For example, you may have heard of “The 36 Questions That Lead
to Love”. The questions originate from a 1997 study where professors paired
students during a regular class session. The students then took turn asking and
answering the questions. Much has been made of the fact that the students
reported ‘significant post-interaction closeness’ relative to other cohorts,
even resulting in improbable marriages.

Because interpersonal vulnerability is so polymorphic, it’s important to be
critical of situations that make people feel vulnerable. Blanket celebration of
“the power of vulnerability” is dangerous, but probably has lasting appeal
because, as Brene Brown writes on [her homepage](http://brenebrown.com/),
"vulnerability sounds like truth and feels like courage." Compulsively
disclosing vulnerabilities only makes sense as a maladaptive coping mechanism
for an environment of permanent psychological insecurity.
