---
layout: post
title: The Art Data Landscape, 2021 
date: 2021-09-17
category: Notes
lede: "In 2017 I became dangerously obsessed with blockchain and pigeons."
author: Patrick Steadman
published: true
image: "http://computerlab.io/images/art_data_landscape.png"
---

![Arts Data Industry Landscape Diagram](/images/art_data_landscape.png)

The first time I ever saw an _industry landscape_ was on my first day as an intern ad tech company
back in 2014. It was part of a slide deck meant to introduce us to the ad tech ecosystem, make us
aware of the data and financial flows between its sub-sectors, each consisting of dozens of
competing companies. The presenter zoomed in our logo, and proceeded to explain our small but
integral and arguably pro-social role.

![Ad tech landscape.](/images/ad_tech_landscape.jpg)

Insofar as the above image produces a vague sense of awe, the term _industry landscape_ might seem
like a good name for this type of infographic. But if these images type of image produces a sort of
dreary economic trypophobia, the term _industry ecosystem diagram_ might seem more appropriate: we
have densely-packed producers and consumers locked in wars of attrition over precarious niches,
parasitism, wastes repurposed as sustenance, and the ceaseless sedimentation of death. On Twitter
I've seen the [cloud native landscape](https://landscape.cncf.io/) compared to everything from the
[metabolic pathways of the human body](http://biochemical-pathways.com/#/map/1) to The Garden of
Earthly Delights. 

![The Cloud Native Interactive Landscape](/images/cloud_native_landscape.png)

![Metabolic pathways of life.](/images/metabolic_pathways_landscape.png)

I think often these images are created for promotional reasons, either to promote specific companies
within the ecosystem or the ecosystem as a whole. I think that in some part, creators of this type
of image must simply enjoy the visual complexity, or enjoy being able to reify something both as
abstract and impactful as a virtual industry. 

![Arts Data Industry Landscape Diagram](/images/art_data_landscape.png)

One question you might have about the arts data landscape is: how does the arts data landscape
relate to the overall art industry landscape? Or the overall data landscape? The global annual spend
on database software alone is on the same order of magnitude as the global art market: roughly [$76
billion](https://www.thebusinessresearchcompany.com/report/database-software-market) on databases
versus about
[$67b](https://www.ubs.com/global/en/our-firm/art/collecting/art-market-survey.html#artmarketreport2019)
on fine art in 2019. Arts data is a marginal use case for data software, and in many ways arts
*data* is peripheral to art and the art world. So why look into arts data, rather than simply going
to a museum, or spending your time building scalable time-series databases for wind farms or
something?

I think that fine arts data has a good balance of being pretty *interesting* and *relatable* while
being relatively *non-toxic* and also arguably *commercially relevant* while not prohibitively
*proprietary*. One might call it *charismatic data*. Examples of *uncharismatic data* include data
like electronic health records (very toxic: if you leak it, you have to report it in the paper),
high frequency financial data (expensive), large hadron collider data (unrelatable), and online
advertising data (boring). 

I read somewhere that one of the reasons people like studying art is that it's basically illustrated
history; history as told by quirked-up aesthetes as opposed to economists and military experts. The
history of surplus. And contemporary art is also a sort of map of surplus, a "topology of particular
places" as Boris Groys. 

I think for all the reasons above, the art data landscape is pretty crowded with projects started by
entrepreneurs who wanted a nice lifestyle business, or academics looking for a suitable data set to
try out their new ML system. I think there might also be a bit a of a "tech savior" dynamic going
on, where someone from tech, academia, or finance feels like they can bring the light of data-driven
decision making to the benighted art world.  If this landscape dissuades one burnt out tech emigree
from thinking that the art world is desperately in need of a data savior, my work will not have been
in vain. 

But in one important respect, the art world is quite benighted, and data can serve as our light. The
art world is benighted in the sense that most people engage with the art world primarily via
galleries and museums (and maybe now also social media). All of these institutions have strong
vested interests in their constituent artists and traditions, and no matter how balanced a museum
or mega-galleries curators might be, at a fundamental level they're probably still shills for the
whole idea of *art* itself, if only for the simple reason that it pays their bills, either in cash
or in clout. Trying to learn about art from International Art English written by galleries and
museums is like trying to learn about online advertising from ad tech solution marketing copy. If
you want, at this point you can give up on trying to learn about art and throw the baby out with the
bathwater if you wish, that is certainly valid. But by leveraging some of the art data platforms in
the landscape, specifically by exploring *secondary market sales* and the *network structure of
exhibitions and artists* I think it's possible to get a more contextual understanding of
contemporary art. That's not to say that this understanding is any more enjoyable than going
to museums, fairs, and galleries; I think it's just more lucid and more predictive.

How does one explore the *network structure of exhibitions and artists*? Now is a good to introduce
a tool from the art data landscape: [Artfacts](https://artfacts.net/). The basic value of Artfacts
is that it ranks artists based on exhibition history rather than sale price or critical reception.
The intuition behind this is a history of exhibitions at institutions that also show other artists
with a sustained history of exhibitions is a good signal of artistic merit, harder to manipulate
than sale prices, social media, or critical reception. This sort of metric also captures the fact
that art is almost always part of a context of other artists working in some sort of scene anchored
by institutions. If you would like to learn about how this ranking is calculated, I recommend
watching this video:

part of the point of art to me is the process of evolving my aesthetic sense, learning to appreciate
more subtle beauty, more terrifying eroticisms, etc. attempt to reconcile the virtues I recognize in
daily life with the world of appearances

There's a lot of information asymmetry.  John Berger style "does this piece speak to you" rhetoric
has its place, but a McDonald's Big Mac speaks to me at a very deep level, like, at certain
peripheral times in my life a Big Mac Meal has certainly spoken to the core of my being and brought
tears to my eye. People don't want to spend amounts of money equivalent to a car or house on a work
of art that ages like a Big Mac. Because then henceforth that piece will scream to you: you got
scammed! Ideally, they want stuff that ages like a good wine or liquor. Or, for the many art
enjoyers who cannot afford a car or house, let alone art, for whom the sacred nature of art may be
more sharply relevant, it is just as important to avoid identifying with the work of a lame artist,
a false prophet.
