---
layout: post
title: Seven Bars to Code at in Brooklyn
date: 2017-05-03
category: Notes
lede: In my opinion, bars are a much better place to code than coffee shops.
author: Patrick Steadman
published: true
image: "/images/coding-at-bar.jpg"
---

<center>![bars to code at](/images/coding-at-bar.jpg)</center>

__In my opinion, bars are better places to code than coffee shops.__

First, bars are essentially hardwood standing desks. In general, the surfaces in
bars tend to be flatter and more steady. I hate the feeling of trying to code at
a wobbly little cafe table.

Second, bars tend to have more power outlets. Most recently-opened bars have
power strips running under the bar or along seating areas. I assume this is
because bars want people to linger: someone staying at a bar for a few hours
will likely order a number of drinks at $5 - $12 each, whereas someone staying
at a cafe will only order a $3 - $5 coffee and maybe a snack.

Third, bars tend to be darker and cooler, relative to cafes, which are often
stuffy and sunny.

Finally, after a good coding session, I often find myself in a sort of distant,
aphasic state. Everything seems flat and it's hard to think of anything to say.
Being at a bar gives me a chance to turn off my computer, find someone to talk
to, and reintegrate into daily life.

Of course, not all bars are good places to code. Here's a list of bars that
Computer Lab members have found with the social factors, wifi, food, and
acoustics necessary for productive computer use.

### Mother's
Williamsburg [Map](https://goo.gl/maps/So1UNBjJpio)

[mothersbrooklyn.com](https://mothersbrooklyn.com)

According to Kelsey Hunter, the ideal Mother's coding session starts with a
burger and fries, then a lemonade, and ends with a draft beer. Mother's also has
a lot of outlets, ok wifi, and a backyard for phone calls. The $12 lunch special
lasts until 5PM.  They have TVs with movies so you have something to look at
while sitting alone absorbing the sound of other's social interactions.

### Skytown
Bushwick [Map](https://goo.gl/maps/SwAZJAFYTwR2)

[skytownbk.com](http://www.skytownbk.com/)

Skytown is where I started coding at bars, and it remains a favorite, probably
due to many nostalgic memories. Skytown serves cheap and excellent bean tacos
until 2:00AM, which is great for people who like to [start coding at
11PM](https://twitter.com/mannynotfound/status/862147137769005056). There's
power outlets under the bar (sometimes you have to ask the bartenders to plug in
the strip), and stable wifi. I've never found the place to be unpleasantly
crowded or loud, and the music tends to be interesting enough that I'm often
able to forego use of my [Bose QuietComfort 35 Noise Cancelling
Headphones](https://www.amazon.com/Bose-QuietComfort-Wireless-Headphones-Cancelling/dp/B01E3SNO1G),
probably because one of the bartenders works at a pirate radio station. Finally,
I've met a wide range of interesting people there, including a recruiter from
the Fed who attempted to whiteboard me on the spot.

### Sugarburg
Williamsburg [Map](https://goo.gl/maps/A2iQNHNmyTs)

[sugarburg.com](http://sugarburg.com)

### Boobie Trap
Bushwick [Map](https://goo.gl/maps/Q3CUv7sTRVE2)

[boobietrapbrooklyn.com](http://boobietrapbrooklyn.com)

[Robert Jensen](http://you.could.use.some.r1b.solutions/) says that Boobie Trap
is actually a pretty horrible place to code (it's very loud and the tables are
sticky), but it's one of the few places along the L in Bushwick with good
internet.  He goes there to push docker containers and backups.

### 61 Local
Cobble Hill [Map](https://goo.gl/maps/4VdkZB9xAcv)

[61local.com](http://61local.com)

Each month, a room upstairs at 61 Local hosts the exclusive [BrooklynJS
meetup](http://brooklynjs.com/). If you can't get a ticket to the event, the bar
is still a good place to catch a glimpse of a local JavaScript celebrity like
Jenn Schiffer or Steve Klabnik. The place has a good atmosphere, airy with nice
lighting and acoustics. The menu is varied and extensive. It opens early, so
seats with outlets can be hard to find, and closes around midnight (relatively
early).

### The Roof
Gowanus [Map](https://goo.gl/maps/SwRfPpz7AbC2)

[wholefoodsmarket.com/stores/thirdand3rd](http://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/stores/thirdand3rd)

### Flowers For All Occasions
Bedford-Stuyvesant [Map](https://goo.gl/maps/2KfMCU1C95x)

[flowersforalloccasions.org](http://flowersforalloccasions.org)
