---
layout: post
title: "Computer Lab Computer Diary: Patrick Steadman"
date: 2017-11-10
category: Notes
lede: "Computer Lab's Computer Diaries ask anonymous city dwellers to record a week of their computer use, with sometimes comic, often tragic and always revealing results. This week is Computer Lab partner Patrick Steadman, 25." 
author: Patrick Steadman
published: true
image: "http://computerlab.io/images/power-of-vulnerability.png"
---

### Monday, October 30th 2017

4AM: Wake up because I fell asleep with the lights on and my contacts in. Before
going back to sleep, I write for about forty minutes using the ThinkPad t440s
that lives on my desk. I've removed the laptop's bottom plastic enclosure
because of some sort of issue that causes the fan to randomly run at full power.
When the case is removed, the fan works normally. This computer is called
`daughter`. I bought it in college, when I was super obsessed with ThinkPads.

8AM: Wake up and spend about twenty minutes on my iPhone 6s catching up on
Slack. I call my iPhone `shitbird`.  I'm excited about an article my colleague
Willis has posted about medical over-treatment and over-testing; it's related to
the writing I was doing about copays just a few hours earlier at 4AM.

10:30AM: Arrive at the Computer Lab office in Tribeca. I don't look at my phone
on the train, instead I read the Wall Street Journal, though I do block out the
noise of the train using Bose QuietComfort noise cancelling headphones. It's
monday, so I spend about 45 minute performing accounting tasks using my phone
and my desktop tower computer, called `largeson`.  I built it earlier this year,
it's a beast with an 8 core CPU running at XXGHz, 16GB of RAM, a graphics card,
booting Ubuntu from 512GB M2 SSD. I deposit a bunch checks that arrived on
Saturday, which puts me in an even better mood. The work is easier to do with
two large desktop monitors.

Noon: Feed the pigeons and get a haircut.

1PM: Take a call from my desktop using Gotomeeting and my Plantrionics
headphones. I really want to find a headset that'll make my voice sound great in
all sorts of environments. The Plantronics headset's headphones aren't great
though.

2PM: Head back to Brooklyn to work at my friend's house. I code on my GPD
pocket, or `smolson`, which fits in the pocket of my coat. No need to carry a
bag!

![GPD pocket (not mine).](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/DHI-InZXgAEmggO.jpg)

6:15PM: Take a call with my friend in the parking lot of Costco. I'm worried
that my `shitbird` phone will have issues, so we use Zoom on her iPhone 6s Plus.

8:30PM: Head a screening party with my GPD pocket (smolson). Hope that I'll get
a chance to write, but drink because I feel anti-social.

### Tuesday, October 31th 2017

9:00AM: Get a ride back home to Bed-Stuy from Ridgewood. Decide to work from
home, since I'll go to yoga in Greenpoint that evening. 

10:00AM - 6:00PM: Bill 4.5 hours for coding and research. Debug some issues
related to JSON Web Tokens. Auth is always tricky, and I find working from home
is often good for trying to figure out issues like this. Figure everything out
by the time I head to yoga.

9:30PM: Get out of yoga after a two-hour long class. I go across the street to get
some Japanese food. My phone is dead. I sit there a long time, drinking the
complimentary sake and reading the Wall Street Journal.

11:30PM: Get home and fall asleep after a shower.

### Wednesday, November 1st 2017

10:00AM: Wake up without an alarm. Wednesdays are a day off for me, or rather a
"hack day" where I don't really do billable hours. I like to break up the
work week like this.

10:30AM - 11:45AM: Buy a new phone plan from the Verizon website. I've wanted my
own plan for a while, because even though I get a better deal paying for my part
of my family's plan, my siblings and I typically use up all the data before the
end of the month and get throttled. I'd rather be able to use as much 4G LTE
data as necessary, because I don't like connecting to public WiFi networks and
want to use my phone as a tether. At the last moment I decide to get the iPhone
SE (which has the same form factor of the iPhone 5, but the processor of the 6s)
instead of the iPhone 8. What's the point of having a big phone when I have my
`smolson`? I'm also excited to be getting a `718` area code number.

1:00PM: Head into the Computer Lab office.

2:00PM - 11:00PM: Spend most of the day using my `largeson` to research
health insurance options. Do a quick call about the coding work I did the day
before. Feed pigeons.

11:30PM: Get home. Feel like I haven't accomplished much, but remind myself that it's a
day off. I feel like this every Wednesday.

11:45PM: Decide to smoke weed and write. Get surprisingly high and waste more
time (using bumble on my phone...), before finally settling in on my ThinkPad
and making some good edits to my writing.

2:00AM: Eat eggo waffles and pass out.

### Thursday, November 2nd 2017

10:00AM: Wake up, go to gym, then pick up my new iPhone SE. I name this phone
`youngbird`. I like it.

11:00AM - 6:00PM: Do client work using `largeson`. End up writing a small client
library for the Auth0 Authorization API.  Most of the time as a programmer I
feel like I'm completing video-game-like tasks, but sometimes I find myself
dealing with pretty fundamental concepts just to get something to work. It feels
good.

6:00PM - 7:00PM: Use my new phone to call my parents while I clean the office. I
notice `largeson` has accumulated a decent amount of dust. I keep it running
almost constantly; it mines Monero when I'm not using it. (The graphics card has
already paid for itself with mining!)

8:00PM: Get home and spend a while messing with my new phone. I meant to write,
but I end up just doing yoga and going to bed around midnight.

### Friday, November 3nd 2017

8:30AM: Wake up feeling ...awake. It's a beautiful day. I take a shower and set
up my new phone as a 2FA device so I can log into to some client services to
check on things for a weekly meeting at noon. Talk with Rob about security stuff
using keybase.

12:40PM: Finish meeting with client and head into the office. I feel good about
how things are going with the client, we've finally selected a middleware
vendor.

1:30PM-2:30PM: Work with Rob to set up a Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) on AWS
which will be used as the "live fire range" of the Computer Lab CTF. I learn a
lot about networking in the process: I studied information science in college,
so I only have a vague understanding of terms like NAT Gateway, subnet mask,
CIRD block. The familiar AWS interface helps make everything seem a lot less
mysterious. We also set up an EC2 Container Service cluster. We plan to deploy
CTF challenges and scoring servers to this cluster. Now that the cluster is up,
we can get started. I look forward to making some great Dockerfiles.

3:00PM-7:30PM: Zachary and Elias are also at lab. I work on client work,
occassionally breaks to chat. It's Friday! Take a long break to feed pigeons. I
take some video of the birds eating from my hand.

8:00PM - ???: Arrive at Brooklyn Kava. Get some Kratom and use `smolson` to
research healthcare stuff for the event the next day. A bunch of people I know
show up, so I transition to being social. After Kava closes, we head to
Rebecca's and then Skytown. I'm done with computers, besides using my phone to
call an Uber to get home.

### Saturday, November 4th 2017

10:30AM: Wake up feeling extremely rested. Talk with Emily about how I want to
become a part of 'pigeon instagram', and use my phone to add music to footage
from the day before.

12:10PM: Realize that there's no way I'll have time to get breakfast with Emily
and bike to Max's workshop in Red Hook before 1pm. We get an Uber to Pioneer
Works and a get quick brunch nearby. I take notes at the workshop using
`smolson`, and briefly use one of the classroom iMac computers to scrape my
social timeline using a program Max wrote. (The program is an Electron app that
hasn't yet been packaged for Linux.)

4:10PM: Leave workshop, and Uber to Brooklyn Kava.

4:30PM - 11:00PM: Post up in Brooklyn Kava, and alternatively talk with people
about their healthcare options and research a HSA for myself. Make good use of
[Kaiser Family Foundation's Healthcare Reform
FAQs](https://www.kff.org/health-reform/faq/health-reform-frequently-asked-questions/)
and [HSA Search](https://www.hsasearch.com/). I tether `smolson` to my new
Verizon phone because Brooklyn Kava's wifi seems to have an DNS issue that
periodically causes the internet to hang. Rob talks with the bartender about
fixing it. The mobile tether works fine, but is perhaps a bit slower than I had
hoped for.

11:00PM - 3:00AM: Celebrate Rob's birthday. Daylight savings time begins.

### Sunday, November 5th 2017

11:00AM: Wake up and laze about. Start to think that I won't have time to go to
the pigeon shop before it closes at 2PM, but then a friend messages me that
she's in the neighborhood with her car, and is down to give me a ride to the
pigeon shop. I grab `smolson` and `youngbird`.

12:00PM - 4:00PM: The pigeon store is one of the least disappointing experiences
of my life, and confirms my desire to start making more videos of pigeons. Maybe
I will even buy a video camera. I have a lovely afternoon with Nadine. We get
lunch at a Mexican place and talk about our mutual friends on facebook. She
drops me off at Rebecca's, a bar in Bushwick. Bushwick, three days in a row!

4:00PM - 6:00PM: Do a little coding and writing at Rebecca's until a comedy show
starts. Head over to Mood Ring, another recently-opened bar.

7:00PM - 9:00PM: Eat my leftover burrito and finish writing up this diary. I'm
sitting in a booth at Rebecca's with a bunch of other people who are using the
powerstrip.

9:00PM - 11:00PM: My friend arrives and we hang out and drink. We use `smolson`
to order some nootropics and look at our mutual facebook friends.

11:00PM - 12:00PM: My friend leaves because she has class in the morning. I make
some half-drunk shitposts, and Citibike home in the rain.












