---
layout: post
title: The Decentralized Pigeon Flying Game of New York City
date: 2018-01-01
category: Notes
lede: "In 2017, my interest in pigeons increased over 6,800%."
author: Patrick Steadman
published: true
image: "http://computerlab.io/images/google-911.png"
---

__Like many others, in 2017 I became dangerously obsessed with blockchains and
pigeons.__

Some days it felt like my brain was broken because all I could do was watch
videos about the challenges of scaling a global decentralized ledger or a loft
of healthy Birmingham Roller pigeons.

Many people were skeptical of my new interests.

"Pigeons are just rats with wings!" some friends said. "They spread disease!"

I'm accustomed to pigeon FUD. The "rats with wings" phrase was popularized by
the 1980 movie "Stardust Memories", directed by accused child molester Woody
Allen. The belief that pigeons spread disease is a lie spread by pest control
companies who want to sell poisons like Avitrol. Birds who eat Avitrol-laced
seeds suffer horrific seizures and death.

<br />

{% youtube mYdIz9N7TMY %}

<br />

In fact, as documented in [this academic paper from
1965](http://www.jwildlifedis.org/doi/abs/10.7589/0090-3558-1.4.49?code=wdas-site),
it's well-known that the body temperature of pigeons is on average around 108
&deg;F / 43 &deg;C, an unusually high level that makes it difficult for pigeon
pathogens to survive in the human body. This also means that pigeon feet are
pleasantly warm to the touch.

Many people are horrified by pigeon-directed cruelty like Avitrol and live
pigeon shoots, but pigeons are one of the four species that can be killed
without restriction under federal law. You can go into a park in NYC, net
hundreds of pigeons, drive them to Pennsylvania and shoot them as they're
ejected from a box, and that's perfectly fine legally. The three other
unprotected species are sparrows, starlings, and nutria. In case you don't know
what a nutria looks like, here's a video of a nutria couple having sex:

{% youtube u_H4my-TRgs %}

Pigeons are unprotected because they're a non-native species. Domesticated
pigeons were brought to North America hundreds of years ago, but eventually
pigeons were no longer popular as either food, pets, or messengers. The birds
you see on the streets are the feral descendants of these beloved pet,
messenger, or food birds. They're more like street cats than wild birds.

The bond between man and pigeon is ancient. So, if someone asks me, why do you
like pigeons? I often am tempted to reply, why don't you like pigeons? They are
a partner-species!

I love how pigeons are sensitive enough to see earth's magnetic field and
distinguish between the paintings of Monet and Picasso while also being stoic
enough to fly hundreds of miles to get home and digest New York City garbage.

My love of pigeons was not sparked by one of the local New York City rooftop
"pigeon men", that I think most people are vaguely aware of, maybe thanks to to
the lovely "Pigeon Man" episode of _Hey Arnold!_. Instead, I fell in love with
pigeons after watching an instagram video that my friend Alina sent me, posted
by an account called @pigeon_madrin.

Interacting with pigeons in the park is rewarding because the "homing" nature
the birds means that you see the same birds each day, the variety of colorations
and personality in the birds makes it easy to distinguish the birds. Also,
making friends with a pigeon isn't that hard. I was inspired to actually feed
the pigeons by this video on YouTube called "how to pet a pigeon".


Pigeon breeding, like nutria farming, has been a common site of fraud. There's
even a horribly racist Vice documentary that claims that speculation in fancy
pigeons is a scam rigged by wealthy insiders, especially in China.


"Not everything needs to be pigeons!" fellow Computer Lab partner Zachary once
exclaimed to me. I'm sure many readers have felt the urge to exclaim "Not
everything needs to be blockchain!" at some point this year.

After I learned about the decentralized NYC rooftop pigeon game / competition, I
enjoyed fantasizing about a future when people competed to be the best caretaker
of flocks of wild animals.
