---
layout: post
title: "How to Help a Stringfoot Pigeon"
date: 2020-05-22
category: Notes
lede: "You've likely noticed pigeons with mangled, entangled, or missing toes. Here's how you can help these 'stringfoot' birds."
author: Patrick Steadman and Anya Katz
image: "https://computerlab.io/images/stringfoot-nice-toes.jpg"
published: true
---

![Healthy pigeon toes](/images/stringfoot-nice-toes.jpg)

*Illustrations by [Anya Katz](#).*

### You've probably seen pigeons with mangled, entangled, or missing toes. Here's how you can help these 'stringfoot' birds.

If you pay attention to city pigeons, you'll likely notice that many of them are
missing toes or even entire feet. You might also notice birds limping around
with swollen toes, or feet contorted into little fists. In most cases, closer
inspection will reveal that the swelling is caused by a tight knot of string,
hair, ribbon, wire, or other debris. Once a pigeon's foot gets tangled in
string, there's not much the bird can do: pigeon beaks aren't sharp enough to
cut through string.

These "stringfoot" birds suffer badly. The string gets tighter and tighter until
it cuts off circulation and the flesh rots away. It slices through muscle and
bone. The most unlucky stringfoot pigeons end up with their feet tied together,
vulnerable to predators and pervert flockmates.

Helping a stringfoot pigeon isn’t difficult, and can be extremely rewarding. If
you like watching blackhead removal videos, you might enjoy releasing the
pressure on a swollen pus-filled toe. Or you might enjoy the challenge of
earning the trust of your potential patient, and then catching them with your
bare hands.

### Step One: Assemble a Destringing Kit 

Ideally, when you find a stringfoot pigeon, you will catch him, remove the
tangle, treat any wounds, and release the bird back to his flock. It’s important
to quickly release the bird where you found him, because he might have a bonded
mate or nestling waiting for him. Thankfully, most pigeons can be quickly
dethreaded using a few simple tools, or even your bare hands. Here’s the items
in my “destringing kit”:

![Cutting and Tweezing tools](/images/stringfoot-tools.jpg)

- _Cutting and Tweezing Tools_: I bought this [cheap dissection
  kit](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B01M7VYU82) I found on Amazon because
  it contains a lot of good tools for destringing, including small, sharp
  scissors with flat tips (so you don’t accidentally stab the pigeon) and a pair
  of rat’s tooth tweezers (you can use the “tooth” to pull string out of the toe
  flesh).  

- _Disinfectant_: If the string has cut into the pigeon’s foot, you’ll want to
  disinfect the wound before you let her go. As far as I know, any generic
  antibiotic works for this (I use a neosporin spray), but you could also use an
  antibiotic painkiller formulated for birds, like Butorphano. Interestingly,
  you can order veterinary quantities of drugs that would normally require a
  prescription from [online pigeon supply
  stores](https://www.foyspigeonsupplies.com/medications)!  

![Towel for making pigeon burrito](/images/stringfoot-towel.jpg)

- _Towel and Paper Towels_: The towel is important both to keep your clothes
  clean and to keep the bird calm.  Usually pigeons will hold their poop while
  you’re holding them, but better safe than sorry.  

- _Duffle Bag, Box, or Backpack_: If you find a bird with a really mangled foot
  or other health problems, or if you find a bird when you don’t have your
  destringing kit on you, you’ll need to bring the bird home for treatment. A
  small ventilated box or create is obviously best for this, but I’ve found that
  a duffle bag or backpack with some cardboard at the bottom works fine so long
  as you hold it carefully. Once inside a dark bag or box, a pigeon will usually
  stand still and quiet. In case you find a bird when you’re totally unprepared,
  you can improvise: I once took my sock off and used it to hold the pigeon. Or
  you can just carry the bird in your hands.  

- _Pigeon Feed_: To attract and distract your mark, you’ll normally need some
  food. A birdseed mix for pigeons is best--like [Hagen Pigeon and Dove
  Mix](https://www.amazon.com/Hagen-Pigeon-Staple-Seeds-Pounds/dp/B0002ARVN2)--but
  pigeons have incredibly robust digestive systems so you can improvise here as
  well. I once was able to [sweet talk a young bird into my
  hand](https://www.instagram.com/p/BkQQktjFOqw) without using
  food, but this will probably only work with a desperate, trusting pigeon.  

![Purell for disinfecting hands immediate after releasing pigeon.](/images/stringfoot-purell.jpg)

- _Hand Sanitizer_: You’re unlikely to get
  sick from handling a pigeon, but it’s obviously a good idea to wash your hands
  after handling any wild animal.  
  
- _Pesticide (Optional)_: If you really want to
  make your friend’s day, you can apply a pesticide powder to the bird after
  you’ve resolved their foot problem. This will eradicate any unwanted
  freeloaders.
  
- _Coagulant (Optional)_: Sometimes, in particularly hairy cases (sometimes
  literally hairy), the destringing process will result in bleeding.  Pigeon
  blood doesn’t clot as quickly as human blood, so it’s good to have a coagulant
  on hand to apply to bleeding cuts. I carry around a little baggie of
  cornstarch -- thankfully I have never needed it! You could also use something
  like
  [Clotisol](https://www.amazon.com/Benepet-IWM023887-Clotisol-2-oz/dp/B0002XIZC0).

### Step Two: Observe Some Feral Pigeons

Scattering some food will attract the birds to you so you can inspect their
feet, and will also build trust. Often there will be multiple birds in the flock
with foot problems--identify which are the most in need, and what their
personalities are like. Some birds are trusting, and will eagerly eat from your
hand and allow you to handle them. (Most pigeons aren’t truly wild, they’re
“feral” descendants of domestic animals, kind of like stray cats.) Other birds
may be more wary. Some birds with bad stringfoot will pitifully drag themselves
over to you using their wings, while others will stay at the edge of the flock,
as far away from you as possible.

*Hint*: If you see a stringfoot bird near your home or workplace, you don’t need
to catch and treat it immediately. Pigeons are homebodies, and will typically
forage in a small area near their roost. You can build a relationship with the
bird over time and catch it more easily.  


### Step Three: Set Up the Catch

The best time to catch a pigeon is early in the morning, when the flock is
hungry. By the time evening rolls around, most pigeons in the flock have full
crops and won't risk getting within arm’s reach to eat the seeds you’ve set out.
This is especially true in summer. But in the morning or during winter, hungry
pigeons will climb over each other in a rush to peck up seeds, and it will be
much easier for you to grab your stringfoot patient.

I usually spread some feed around my feet, and position my hands over the seed.
I sit still until the flock (including my target bird) are busy pecking up seeds
below my hand, and then quickly grab my target bird with both hands. This often
requires a decent amount of patience: I’ve found it’s best to wait until my
target bird is right under my hands, preferably squished in with a crowd of
other pigeons. Dropping more seed down into the flock can cause the pigeons to
excitedly crowd each other and forget the human hands hovering above.

It also takes a fair amount of confidence to grab a wild animal. My first
attempts were often too slow or uncertain: while it helps to slowly move your
hands into position, you must fully commit to a grab. Pigeons are relatively
hardy, and so long as you don’t squeeze hard or slam them into the ground,
you’re unlikely to injure the bird. If you miss, simply spread some more seed,
wait for the flock to return, and repeat the process.

This video I filmed with a GoPro headcam illustrates the strategy I’ve described
above:

{% youtube MjQeyDLjJ4o %}

I’m sure there are other ways to catch pigeons, but I’ve found this method works
well for NYC parks, where one doesn’t want to be too disruptive and pigeons tend
to be fairly trusting.

### Step Four: Dethreading

![How to hold a pigeon.](/images/stringfoot-holding.jpg)

As soon as you’ve successfully grabbed a pigeon, your first step is to secure
the bird and calm them down. If a pigeon is [held
correctly](https://www.wikihow.com/Hold-a-Pigeon), so that legs are flush with
their tail and wings are held against the body, the bird is unlikely to
struggle. Once I’m properly holding the bird, I often flip them upside down,
and/or wrap a towel around their whole body to create a “pigeon burrito”. If
this is done properly, the pigeon won't try to escape, which will make your
dethreading work much easier and safer.

If the thread, hair, or other entanglement has not yet cut into a pigeon’s foot,
the de-threading process is usually fairly straightforward. Just make sure to
throw out the string when you’ve removed it so that it doesn’t entangle another
bird.

![An relatively easy case.](/images/how-to-help-white-pigeon.jpg)

> A relatively straightforward case of stringfoot where string has not yet cut
> into the foot.

But if the string has cut into the pigeon’s foot, the dethreading process can be
quite difficult, and take over a half hour in the most difficult cases. In
tricky cases, especially cases involving hair or very fine thread, the most
important thing is to make sure the hair or thread has been compleletely removed
from where it has cut into the toes. Sometimes, the thread has cut so deeply
into the toe that skin has begun to grow on top of the thread. In these cases, I
follow a procedure:

1) Thoroughly clean and disinfect the area around the cut, removing any dead
skin that has grown over the string.

2) Remove any easily-removed loops of string. I make sure not to make any
frivilous cuts: the goal is to remove whole knots of string at a time, so that
I'm sure that all the string has been removed.

3) Search for an "end" of the string. If an end is found, begin unwinding. If an
end can't be found, use a pair of tweezers to pull the thread or hair out of the
cut. Use a mangifying glass to ensure that all the thread has been pulled out.
Cut all the strands at once. Hopefully the knot will fall off the foot.

4) Dispose of the thread, and thoroughly clean / disinfect the foot and your
tools.

I recommend starting with cases where it seems like the thread has not yet cut
into the foot. Also, I recommend avoiding attempting to "treat" birds where a
toe looks like it's about to fall off, skin has completely grown over a loop of
string, or where the pigeon seems to have fully adapted to their stringfoot,
unless you're ready to take the bird home with you and seek professional help.
Case studies describing some difficult cases are available at the New York Pigeon rescue
club's string removal page below.

![Pigeon missing their entire foot](/images/stringfoot-missing-toes.jpg)

> Pigeons can survive tangles that cut off circulation from all toes and
> eventually result in all toes falling off. However, missing or injured toes
> cause serious problems for pigeons, especially in the winter when pigeons
> benefit from switching feet to keep toes warm.

### Further Reading, Resources, and Communities

New York Pigeon Rescue Central "Foot Squad" information page:
http://nycprc.org/StringRemoval.html

Stringfoot Pigeon NYC Facebook Group:
https://www.facebook.com/groups/167760393812237

How to catch pigeon from standing position:

{% youtube xgwO4EVKVxM %}

Pigeon foot string removal in NYC, with more info on treating pigeons with other
problems:

{% youtube JEfHdjw4N9g %}
