---
layout: post
title: When I Was a Child, I Wanted to be a Consultant
date: 2016-04-15
category: Notes
lede: The story of the moment someone realized that he wanted to be a consultant.
author: Patrick Steadman
published: false
---

Here's a memory that I feel like I made up, it's so surreal:  

When I was an exchange student in Taipei, an American friend and I went to a
quiet place he'd found on the Danshui river with public KTV machines and
barbecue pits.  We were both very serious about learning Mandarin, and both
believed that singing karaoke and visiting temples was a good way to do this.
The KTV pavilions were hidden under willow trees, on a riverbank broken up by a
network of cement levees and flood plains.  It took us a while to find a place
that seemed inviting.  

We stood outside the pavilion listening to some older people sing, before we
finally ventured in and attempted to buy some snacks.

My friend asked for the laminated songbook, and a woman helped him find a song
he knew.   I sang after him, singing my favorite Teresa Teng song.  I felt like
I was the better singer. 

After, we wandered around, talking at length.  For the last time in my life, I
discussed with someone the question of what I wanted to do "when I grew up".  I
told my friend that I wanted to "have an office where I waited for people to
come in with problems, and then I would solve them."  

My friend told me that my life dream was weird, and that he wouldn't want a job
like that.

"Fair enough," I said.

Another surreal memory is a place in the Yamingshan mountains with an indoor
swimming pool full of giant shrimp.  The proprietor gave each member of my host
family a small fishing rod, and we sat at the edge of the pool.   My host mother
brought me a carbonated bitter orange drink.  After putting the lure in the
water, it generally only took a few minutes to catch a shrimp.  A little boy was
with us, and he laughed excitedly when the shrimp were caught.  They were about
the size of my hands.  The shrimp were then covered in chunks of salt and put
through one of the metal conveyor belt toasters you typically see at a hotel
breakfast.  It was really delicious.
