---
layout: post
title: Ten Inspiring Software Consultancies
date: 2016-12-19
category: Notes
lede: Software consultancies that inspired Computer Lab in 2016, and what makes them special.
author: Patrick Steadman
published: true
---

One big thing I learned this year is that there's no one right way to run a
software consulting business. I've tried to become a student of the industry,
and in reading the blogs of successful companies, I've often found that the best
practices of one consultancy are considered anti-patterns at another. For
example, some companies proudly call themselves Agile or Scrum teams, while
others are defined by their rejection of Agile practices. Some groups care a lot
about accounting, business, and finance, while other companies outsource those
concerns and focus on code or relationships.

I think rapid changes in the world of software development spur consultancies to
dance around, trying to find their place. But ultimately, it's personal. Each of the
following companies represents a worldview, a coherent idea of how a group of
people can happily write software and make money.

### thoughtbot

[thoughtbot.com](https://thoughtbot.com)

__"Let's create something that your users will love."__

thoughtbot is the canonical example of a good software consulting company. They
set the standard for how a consultancy can [contribute to open
source](https://github.com/thoughtbot), [externalize business
processes](https://thoughtbot.com/playbook), [launch
products](https://formkeep.com/), and [do good client
work](https://thoughtbot.com/work/tile). The simplicity of thoughtbot's
designer/developer organization structure is evidence that a consultancy doesn't
need to become a bureaucracy to scale, and the quality of the company's
engineering and design culture puts it on par with par with Facebook, Google,
and other 'top tech companies'.

### Standard Library

[standard-library.com](https://standard-library.com)

__"Design-driven software."__

Standard Library is probably the smallest company on this list, but they're a
great example of a consultancy that has found a well-defined market niche and
created a development philosophy to match it. Their promise of 'design-driven
software' must appeal to institutional clients like the Harvard Design Magazine,
the Whitney Museum, and RISD.

Standard Library's landing page also lists many
collaborations with other agencies and shops, highlighting the (perhaps
under-appreciated) fact that many projects are a joint effort between multiple
companies or freelancers. A company that can work well with a network of other
contractors can potentially do more valuable, strategic work.

### Citrusbyte

[citrusbyte.com](https://citrusbyte.com)

__"Innovate like a startup. Even if you aren't one."__

Citrusbyte helped me realize that the culture of a consultancy doesn't have to
perfectly match the culture of its clients. Sometimes, enterprises will look for
consultants that can work seamlessly with their teams, often on-site. Other
times, enterprises will hire consultants to accomplish tasks that are ill-suited
for their own teams. It's possible to build a great business using either model, but
there are often advantages to building your own culture, owning your own
process, and just focusing on the deliverables that your clients care about.

Focusing on outcomes also makes the sales process more repeatable, because
you're selling an outcome, not trying to be a matchmaker. Repeatable sales and
hiring processes allow a business like Citrusbyte to forecast and plan
effectively.

### Dockyard

[dockyard.com](https://dockyard.com)

__"We build extraordinary user experiences."__

Dockyard is a devshop headquarted in Boston with a Ember specialization, and
seem to have many of the good features of thoughtbot. I discovered the company
through the [founder's blog
posts](https://dockyard.com/blog/2013/12/22/lessons-learned-two-years-of-running-a-dockyard),
which are surprisingly candid. In periodic posts going back to the first months
of the company, he talks about the more emotional, raw aspects of running a
business: firing, acquiring, running out of money, paying oneself, etc. He
shares the exact annual revenue of the company, and writes down his expectations
for the coming year.

All of this gave me a good feel for the subjective experience of a founder, and
how it changes as the company evolves and grows.

### ConsenSys

[consensys.net](https://consensys.net)

__"ConsenSys is a venture production studio building decentralized applications
and various developer and end-user tools for blockchain ecosystems, primarily
focused on Ethereum."__

ConsenSys is interesting because it's a company built around an experimental
technology with a highly uncertain fate: Ethereum. In 2016, Computer Lab had a
fun and profitable time following the emergent cryptocurrency, and we were
amazed to find that an Ethereum consultancy/incubator already existed in
Bushwick, New York, and that it had almost one hundred employees.  Assuming that
the company is venture-backed, it's a very different model from other
consultancies, which typically focus on a relatively well-established technology
in wide production use by a large number of enterprises and small companies.
It'll be fascinating to watch what happens to ConsenSys.

### Formidable

[formidable.com](https://formidable.com)

__"The JavaScript Experts."__

For me, 2016 was the year of ReactJS. ReactJS (and the tools it is associated
with, like Babel, Webpack, Redux, etc) fundamentally changed how I do web
development, and the demand for ReactJS development helped to get Computer Lab
off to a fast start. In my mind, Seattle-based Formidable is the primere React
consultancy, mostly because of their open source projects and compelling work
with enterprise clients like Walmart and Starbucks. A lot of the open source
work is driven by the indomitable [Ken Wheeler](https://github.com/kenwheeler),
who seems to look at things in the world and think 'there should be a React
renderer for that!'.

### Math & Pencil

[mathandpencil.com](http://mathandpencil.com)

__"We are your foundation."__

Math and Pencil, based in New York, with a design office in Buffalo, is on this
list for two reasons: the fact that they have an office in my hometown, and
because they're a successful small data science consultancy. I think there's a
lot of potential in the area of data science and data engineering. While not all
companies have a need for custom software development, the need to move and
understand data is pretty universal, and serviceable by individuals and small
teams.

### Hello Velocity

[hellovelocity.com](https://hellovelocity.com)

__"Hello Velocity experiments with branding and marketing to provoke
conversation."__

Our friends at Hello Velocity understand that there's very little difference
between marketing and trolling. Their experimental 'vaporware' projects are
entertaining and effective at getting media attention, and they bring this
thought process to client work.

### Gigster

[gigster.com](https://gigster.com)

__"Software on demand."__

Gigster is less inspiring, and more terrifying. The venture-backed company is
focused on fixed-price MVPs built by teams of engineers looking to make money
moonlighting on the side. Their [landing
page](https://gigster.com/about/intelligence) talks about modelling the
development process using finite-state machines, health scores, and AI. Gigster,
and some other companies like Hired, are less intereted in building a consulting
company, and more interested in building an Uber-like platform that fulfills the
same needs. It's unclear how well that approach will work, but the fact that the
company is willing to execute projects at a loss while they build the platform
could potentially poison the MVP market, and eventually become an existential
threat to the "lifestyle" companies they deride.

### Ribbonfarm Consulting

[ribbonfarm.com/consulting](http://www.ribbonfarm.com/consulting/)

__"Experiments in refactored perception."__

Not so much a software development company, blogger Venkatesh Rao's consulting
practice looks at large and small organizations as refactorable spaces. Most
software consultancies typically avoid issues that are traditionally the domain
of management consulting companies. But in the future, more and more enterprises
will probably want organizational transformations and comparative best practices
along with their software deliverables.  Pivotal's landing page already talks
about "adopting the Silicon Valley state of mind".  It'll be interesting to see
which software consultancy will be the first to reach the dizzying multinational
heights of McKinsey or Bain.

