---
layout: post
title: What Peter Thiel's Favorite Book Says About America's Future
date: 2017-05-14
category: Notes
lede: \'The Sovereign Individual\' predicts a future where all citizens are customers of the state, but some have the power of Greek gods while others remain 'cyberpoors'.
author: Patrick Steadman
published: true
image: "https://computerlab.io/images/balaji.png"
---

<center>![Balji](/images/balaji.png)</center>

__"The Sovereign Individual" predicts a future where all citizens are
customers of the state, but some have the power of Greek gods while others
remain 'cyberpoors'.__

The piety that rationalized the saturation of society by organized religion in
the late Middle Ages served the same purpose as the "compassion" that is meant
to justify the political domination of life today. The sale of indulgences to
satisfy a desire for piety without morals parallels lavish welfare spending to
slake the pretense of compassion without charity. It was largely immaterial
whether the actual effect of received practices was to improve moral character
or save souls, just as it is largely immaterial whether a welfare program
actually improves the lives of the people to whom it is directed. "Piety," like
"compassion," was an almost superstitious invocation.

In a time when causal relationships were scarcely understood, rituals and
sacraments of the Church permeated every phase of life. ". . . A journey, a
task, a visit, were equally attended by a thousand formalities: benedictions,
ceremonies, formulas." 54 Prayers inscribed on pieces of parchment were strung
like necklaces on those suffering from fevers. Malnourished girls draped locks
of their hair in front of the image of St.  Urban to prevent further hair loss.
Peasants in Navarre marched in processions behind an image of St. Peter to
solicit rain during droughts .55 People eagerly adopted these and other
"ineffective techniques to allay anxiety when effective ones were not
available."

It may not be a coincidence that the great transition at the end of the
fifteenth century occurred at a time when land rents were rising and real wages
for the peasantry were in decline. Increased population pressures had reduced
the yield from the common lands, often found surrounding rivers and streams,
upon which peasants depended to graze their livestock, and in some cases, for
fish and firewood. The whittling down of living standards placed increasingly
urgent pressures on peasants to find alternative sources of income. As a result,
"more and more of the rural population turned to small- scale manufacturing for
the market, above all in textiles, in the process known as 'putting- out' or
'proto-industrialization.' "The ceremonial burdens on time imposed by the Church
stood in the way of efforts by the more ambitious peasants to supplement their
farming income by craft work, as indeed they inhibited any redeployment of
effort in new economic directions.

The cultural programming of the late Middle Ages encouraged people to see the
world in terms of symbolic similitude rather than cause and effect. This
short-circuited reasoning. It also pointed away from a mercantile conception of
life. Thinking in terms of symbolic equivalences does not easily translate into
thinking in terms of market values. "The three estates represent the qualities
of the Virgin. The seven electors of the Empire signify the virtues; the five
towns of Artois and Hainault, which in 1477 remained faithful to the house of
Burgundy, are the five wise virgins. . . .  In the same way shoes mean care and
diligence, stockings perseverance, the garter resolution, etc."65 As this
example quoted from the distinguished medieval historian Johan Huizinga
suggests, thinking was dominated by dogma, rigid symbols, and allegory that tied
together every aspect of life in terms of hierarchic subordination. Every
occupation, every part, every color, every number, ev

The technology of the Information Age makes it possible to create assets that
are outside the reach of many forms of coercion.

We wrote in The Great Reckoning that the computer is enabling us to "see" the
formerly invisible complexity inherent in a whole range of systems.
