---
layout: post
title: Why Copays are Fucking Stupid
date: 2017-10-30
category: Notes
lede: "In the information age, violence still serves as an accelerant for technological change."
author: Patrick Steadman
published: true
image: "http://computerlab.io/images/google-911.png"
---

__In the information age, violence still serves as an accelerant for technological change.__

In the process of looking for a health insurance plan for Computer Lab, I asked
myself a simple question: could we offer a comprehensive plan that would result
in employees NEVER needing to pay out-of-pocket for healthcare costs? I'm a
naive small business owner, but this doesn't seem like too much to ask: after
all, in countries with single payer healthcare, every citizen is simply born
with this right. Ostensibly, the relationship between an employee and employer
is such that the employee gives the employer most of their waking hours in
exchange for the assurance that their basic needs (like healthcare) will be met.
And ultimately, this is the healthcare plan that I'll have when I turn twenty
six and get off my mom's insurance. I want it to be simple and good.

I recently realized that going to the psychiatrist is one of the most stressful
experiences in my day-to-day life. I spend about an hour in transit to be
depersonalized by an man who often forgets what drug I'm on and belittles me if
I'm even a minute late, all to recieve a pretty benign drug that I was
prescribed many years ago by a different doctor.

The fact that each time I go visit this psychiatrist, I pay $20, and then
another $7 for the drug, seems to mostly serve as a perverse reminder that I
should be GRATEFUL that the insurance company is covering most of the cost.
(Nevermind that due to a recent job change, my mom's insurance suddenly longer
covers me in New York City, and I need to pay 100% of the cost until I set up
Lab insurance. I've discussed with many people how health insurance almost seems
designed to fail in situations where people are most vulnerable: moving between
jobs and cities, or when their parents suddenly become unemployed.)

In looking at the plans offered by startups like Gusto or Justworks, the cost of
plans is split between employers and employees, which is called "cost sharing".
But this doesn't include those damned co-pays. The rationale behind co-pays is
that they prevent "moral hazard". Though the copay is often a small portion of
the actual cost of the medical service, it is meant to prevent people from
seeking medical care that may not be necessary (e.g., an infection by the common
cold). The underlying philosophy is that with no copay, people will consume much
more care than they otherwise would if they were paying for all or some of it.
Essentially, copays are sold as a cost control and capacity control measure.

While this makes sense in a freshman year econ class way, I don't think it makes
much sense in reality. First, some intuitive counterarguments: most people have
much better things to do than go to the doctor, and even if they went to the
doctor a lot, woulnd't that help society as a whole become more healthy,
assuming healthcare is actually good for people?

Of course, these intuitive counterarguments are not sufficient. 


Even if copays worked as a cost-control mechanism, why is it that patients end
up as the ultimate bagholders?

